Added feature freeze news post (#147)
eclipse-4diac/4diac-website-hugo: content/news/2025/2025-10-23-30_feeturefreeze.md

---
title: "Eclipse 4diac 3.0 Enters Feature Freeze!"
date: 2025-10-22T09:00:00-00:00
categories: ["Releases"]
type: "newsitem"
description: |

>   After more than two years of development and over 7200 commits across 4diac IDE and 4diac FORTE, Eclipse 4diac 3.0 has the **feature freeze phase**! 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  After more than two years of development and over 7200 commits across 4diac IDE and 4diac FORTE, Eclipse 4diac 3.0 is now in the **feature freeze phase**! 
```

With the feature freeze in place, our focus now shifts to **stabilization and polishing** to ensure a solid and reliable 3.0 release, planned for about three weeks from now.

---

## Highlights of Eclipse 4diac 3.0

This release brings a wealth of new functionality, improved usability, and major internal modernization across all core components.

### — 4diac IDE
- Refactoring functions in graphical and textual editors  
- Validation of IEC 61499 projects, including support for loading and repairing incomplete projects  
- Completely reworked and largely improved the IEC 61131-3 Structured Text editors  
- Interpreter for IEC 61131-3 Structured Text allowing testing and debugging of FBs directly in 4diac IDE  
- Support for named constants  
- A new library and package system  
- Added IEC 61131-3 functions and `VAR_IN_OUT` support  
- Simplified deployment and monitoring, with the ability to store deployment and monitoring configurations

###  — 4diac FORTE
- Modernized code base and build system  
- Greatly reduced overhead in event processing and data connection handling

###  — 4diac FBE
- **New component in 4diac 3.0**  

> - A build environment for simplifying the creation of 4diac FORTE binaries for different target systems  

Author: Thx, updated accordingly.
